um hello David Deutsch are you on the
other end there
yes hello
it's great to have you here on blogging
heads David let me just introduce myself
and then I'll let you do the same okay I
am John Horgan I'm a science journalist
an occasional science correspondent for
blogging heads TV and I have a really
special guest with me today
um the physicist British physicist David
Deutsch who is now in you're in Oxford
right now that's right
so David could you just give us a little
background
on yourself and then we'll uh we'll
start talking about your wonderful new
book
certainly uh so my name is David Deutsch
and I'm a physicist at Oxford University
and I'm the author of two books the
fabric of reality and recently the
beginning of infinity
David
um you were often described as
a pioneer of or even the father of uh
Quantum computation
um and that's been a that's been a theme
in uh in both of your books can you just
describe a little bit about how you got
into that field I wish I think was quite
a while ago a couple of decades ago
yes uh it was actually I actually began
thinking about quantum computers in the
1970s although uh I didn't call them
that then because
um I didn't think of them as being
anything to do with the foundations of
computation
the the context there was the so-called
parallel universes or many universes
interpretation of quantum mechanics
and uh I had realized that the consensus
view that both the proponents and the
opponents of this rather controversial
interpretation had been taking namely
that
it is just a matter of interpretation
and that there are no possible
experimental tests of it
was actually false and that this this uh
this idea that it can't be tested was
simply due to some
um poor thinking about what would happen
when an observer did a measurement on
another Observer and so on and so I I
was trying to clarify
this issue of what an observer is in in
quantum mechanics and so I thought well
the simplest way to clarify that is to
make and is to imagine an artificial
Observer and what would be called an AI
or an AGI an artificial general
intelligence but running on the hardware
that obeys quantum mechanics
and of course all hardware-based quantum
mechanics but I was thinking of Hardware
that obeys it in a way that can be
tested in the laboratory
and so
um I imagined an AI program running on
this Quantum hardware and then I added a
few extra
um uh Elementary operations to this
computer which would be
uh
sorry that was
okay they'll have to cut out this bit
um that's okay it's those little
glitches that make blogging heads so
Charming to some people
okay
um
uh
yes so that I had to add a couple of
extra
operations to this computer uh because
that's what made the difference between
doing this experiment with with a
computer the device quantum mechanics
and an ordinary computer the kind of
computer that we know that we're
familiar with
and given those extra operations it was
possible to perform an experiment whose
outcome would be one way if there was
only one Universe if something like the
Copenhagen interpretation the wave
function collapse interpretation or any
single Universe interpretation of
quantum mechanics were true and would go
another way if the uh many universes
interpretation was true and so as a sort
of side effect of this
um I realized that
quantum mechanical computers would be
inherently more powerful than that they
could perform more qualitatively
different computations than classical
ones
and then later yes later I think yes
maybe you should just back up and we
can't assume that our um our listeners
are completely familiar with all the
different interpretations of quantum
mechanics just uh remind us of what the
many worlds or many universities
interpretation of quantum mechanics is
and how it differs from say I don't know
the the Copenhagen interpretation if
that's kind of the more mainstream uh
view of what quantum mechanics means
um to explain what quantum computers are
I have to explain
um what quantum mechanics is from my
point of view and and I adhere to What's
called the parallel universes or many
universes interpretation proposed by
Hugh Everett in 1957.
um I I it it says that the Universe we
see around us is just a tiny facet of
the whole of physical reality which and
and so if we want to retain the same
word for Universe we have to invent
another word for the whole thing and I I
favor the word Multiverse for the whole
of reality
uh this uh in my view and in the view of
its proponent its other proponents this
um is an incontrovertible
implication of quantum theory which is
our most fundamental theory in physics
but I I always have to to uh warn the
viewer immediately that this view is
shared by by perhaps fewer than 10 of
theoretical physicists
at any rate uh that that's the that's
what I take quantum theory to say
and quantum computers are computers that
harness quantum theory
to perform a a different mode of
computation something that cannot be
performed by existing classical
computers at all
I see okay
um
I want to come back to Multiverse
theories and the uh and the um multiple
Universe interpretation but let's let's
talk about your book
now I'm holding up
the galleys that I got from the Wall
Street Journal when I reviewed your book
the beginning of infinity and I should
say that the um
the the journal I think asked me to
review your book because
um it is almost the antithesis of a book
that I wrote in in 1996 the end of
Science and in fact at the very end of
your book you uh you mentioned my book
and um and reject its claim that science
might be uh approaching its limits very
forcefully I think the journal expected
me to uh lay waste to your book they
thought that that would be entertaining
and I fully expected to do that when I
started reading you but I ended up
really loving your book I I think it
wasn't what I expected at all it's
um it's a really Grand Vision of uh
human possibility and it got me
questioning my own
pessimism
um about the future of Science and it's
even technological progress so
um could you just tell us what where did
this where did the idea for this first
of all say give us a nutshell version of
the the books theme and then
um and also say give us some sense of of
where the ideas came from
yes uh so the the the basic theme of the
book is that all human progress in the
past has been fundamentally caused by a
single kind of activity which I I call
the Quest for good explanations
uh explanations being
accounts of some kind of reality
and how it works and why
um and pursuing this theme of what an
explanation is why the Quest for good
and good explanations can work and so on
um it makes contact with with a whole
lot of other bits of Science and
philosophy and so on which together
imply that this process need never come
to an end that is we could bring it to
an end if we destroy ourselves or decide
not to or whatever but there are no
inherent limits
to the growth of knowledge and therefore
to progress and by the way you mentioned
your review of my book I thought it was
exceptionally a nice generous review but
it's funny you should mention your
feelings on reading it because they were
exactly mirrored in my feeling on
reading your book I I was expecting to
hate everything in it but instead I
merely disagreed with the conclusion it
seemed to me correct me if I'm wrong
about this but it seemed to me that in
every argument in your book there is a
sort of reluctance there there is a wish
that it were otherwise and that your
arguments about these limits you are
forced to them because you think that
that is the logic of the situation
but you would rather that it well
otherwise
and that's that's what I got from your
book
well of course I mean I became a science
writer because I see science as I think
you do as by far our most powerful way
of of understanding ourselves and and
understanding all of reality and uh and
I actually got into science journalism
in the early 80s when there was talk of
a Theory of Everything Stephen Hawking
had predicted the end of physics there
would be this great Revelation at the
end of uh of our our quest to understand
everything
um and uh I was enormously disappointed
when I I got into what after went after
a period of time I I started suspecting
that maybe
um
maybe uh science was already bumping
into walls and uh and and we wouldn't
get these great revelations in the
future so you're absolutely right
I I think these walls uh of our own
making
um the that they're not inherent in the
subject of I mean this is my subject the
the book covers all subjects and by the
way not only science I think this thing
about the Quest for good explanations
has been responsible for all progress
such as moral progress political
progress artistic progress every kind
but science is my field in physics in
particular and uh it is true that
progress in fundamental physics
uh was reached an all-time high in the
early 20th century
and although it hasn't uh it's by no
means uh uh gone to zero now it is lower
now than it has been at the time in the
past and this has caused some people to
think that we may be running out of
either we may be reaching the end as you
I mean in your book you'll give both
possibilities either we're reaching the
end of all and knowledge so that we'll
understand everything or we're reaching
the end of
the capacity of science
to create knowledge and either way we're
we're heading for a brick wall now I I
think
um
this apparent brick wall as always in
the history of knowledge was not caused
by anything in the subject it was caused
by what people have chosen to do
um and you you mentioned the The Theory
of Everything uh to me the the which is
the theory of all a proposed or or hoped
for
theory of all elementary particles space
time and gravity
um
that uh that theory to me it should not
be called The Theory of Everything that
that is a very tiny facet of physics
from my perspective let alone everything
it's just the theory of how
objects behave but beneath that beneath
all you see all such theories
are formulated within a certain uh uh
profoundly significant language and
conceptual framework namely quantum
theory and uh The Theory of Everything
just assumed that quantum theory would
survive would be exactly the same Theory
after we have discovered this great
unification and also that essentially
that the theory of gravity also would
and that unifying them would simply be
finding a way of writing either of them
in the language of the other
uh and that that's that that has been
the technique of elementary particle
physics for the past several decades and
to me that is simply
what they're doing is they're trying to
formulate a classical Theory not not
counting quantum mechanics you know as
if it was all in one universe as if
there weren't interference phenomena and
and uh tunneling and all those things
just a classical Theory and then they
apply a process that physicists call
quantization which is a way of
transforming a classical Theory into a
quantum theory and so it's so you turn
the handle it's just a mechanical
process
and this
worked for electrodynamics that was that
was the great achievement of Richard
Feynman and Julian schwinger and others
and it really hasn't worked since and I
don't think there's any reason to
believe that this process will ever work
again it was just a stroke of luck that
Quantum electrodynamics can be obtained
from classical electrodynamics by a
mechanical process of quantization
plus a whole load of cleverness but I
don't see my skeptical of I assume that
that would lead you to be skeptical of
uh string theory and even
um Loop space Siri and some of the the
main contenders for uh a theory that
could unify relativity and quantum
mechanics yes unfortunately I I although
I wouldn't say these things aren't worth
doing that because uh if nothing else we
learned from them even when they fail
but it seems to me that progress because
progress comes from good explanations it
has to come from problems because an
explanation is an explanation of
something like how a thing can possibly
be
um and and that means that the
prevailing way of trying to find
fundamental theories in physics is is is
unlikely to succeed because it is
looking for mathematical models and then
trying to understand what that could
possibly mean if it were a theory in
physics
and uh I mean even if you found the
Right theory that way I think there's
chances are fairly low that you'd
recognize it because how do you know
which of those mathematical objects
correspond to which objects in nature
we're assuming that that the future
theory is going to still be based on
things like particles space time fields
and so on but why should it be uh it's a
fundamental progress in the past has
always involved new kinds of entity new
modes of explanation that weren't
thought of before
so uh yes I I'm skeptical that these
approaches any of these approaches can
work and I think that's why there hasn't
been this fundamental progress
David let me raise
um an objection to your optimistic
vision of the future of science which is
it's actually based on my reading of uh
of what quantum mechanics has done uh in
physics
um you you have a passage in your book
where you you recall I think it's Niels
Bohr saying that anybody who thinks he
understands quantum mechanics obviously
doesn't and and you reject that and and
as a kind of know nothingness which is
surprising for someone like four but it
seems to me that if you look at
at sort of in a sociological sense all
the different competing attempts to
understand what the hell quantum
mechanics means that you'd have to grant
that even for the experts
um it the the theory is is quite
confusing on the other hand it's it's
powerful it does anything that you could
want from a theory in terms of being
able to predict experiments and lead to
all sorts of amazing applications and so
forth and so it seems to me that you're
getting a split
um between science as giving us power
over Nature and Science as a mode of
understanding and the understanding uh
and especially then if you look at the
rest of physics as well which has become
for the average person extremely
difficult to understand very esoteric
um I see science as really beginning in
the 20th century becoming more and more
um distant from the comprehension of the
average uh person and
um I I just wonder where your optimism
comes from that somehow in the future I
don't know as a result of
new ideas and physics new ideas about
how unification should take place or
whatever
why we should get the comprehension that
seems to be
retreating now in the past yes
um in my view this split that you talk
about between quantum theory as a
powerful technique for uh building
things and and making predictions and
quantum theory as a way of understanding
nature this split is not a feature of
quantum theory it is a feature of the
sociology of science during the 20th
century the split was introduced as a
matter of philosophical Dogma in order
to protect from criticism the bad
explanations that
um the the founders of the theory and
subsequent physicists have favored for
quantum theory which from the by the way
from the many universes point of view
they are all equivalent to saying well
at some point when we're not looking
all the universes but one suddenly
disappear and uh we can't notice this
because we're not looking and that that
sort of thing and when when the the
response to careful considered criticism
of this view is to say oh well you don't
understand quantum mechanics now
um the thing is we've been here before
uh the the as the uh whoever the the
founder of uh the many universes Theory
pointed out in a famous letter
um we have been here before the the
um a radical change in world view was
occasioned by the discovery of the
heliocentric theory the the the the the
Sun and not the Earth is the center of
the solar system what we now call the
solar system and
um Galileo championed this Theory and uh
in the famous conflict between him and
uh and the Inquisition
they tried to force him to renounce the
theory but if you look in more detail
what they were asking him to renounce
was not the power of the theory not its
ability to predict that they were quite
willing to allow him to to espouse and
to teach and and so on what they wanted
him to reject
um was the claim that this described
reality that this described the solar
system and
the new vision of the solar system that
was entailed by the heliocentric theory
was a jarring change from what had gone
before because for example it meant that
the Earth beneath our feet which is the
Paradigm of something fixed in in the
common sense is actually moving very
fast it's moving at a thousand miles an
hour around the Earth's axis and also
moving around the Sun
and we can't feel this because the laws
of physics are constructed in precisely
such a way as to cancel out any feeling
that we might have about this motion and
people who at first sight this is a
ridiculous idea because it's it's like
what uh Lewis Carroll said uh I was
thinking of a plan to die one's whiskers
green and always use so large a fan that
they could not be seen you know it was
it was accepting one thing just in order
to to make it invisible and then explain
something else and so on and it's only
when you look very carefully at what the
theory says that you see how much and
how enormously better an explanation it
is of the observed motion of the planets
and and so on and then it allowed
further unifications by Newton of
celestial mechanics and terrestrial
mechanics and so on and
um
so this split at that time was an
invention of the Inquisition
the split in quantum mechanics
regrettably
was an invention of its very founders
they didn't want to take the theory
seriously as a description of reality
do you think that Einstein if he was
alive today or had lived long enough to
see you ever it's
Theory
um would have embraced it or would have
made it even more frustrated with
quantum mechanics and convinced that it
had to be incomplete or wrong in some
way
it's it's hard to predict what what an
actual person would have said but if we
if we look at what Einstein wrote about
Quantum Theory and wrote about his his
famous criticism and in his great debate
with Niels Bohr about Quantum Theory all
his criticisms are straightforwardly met
by the many universes interpretation
so he only missed it by two years and
it's very very frustrating
um uh the Bryce DeWitt in his famous
article introducing
um the the many Universe interpretation
in a footnote he he says that Albert
Einstein would surely have liked this
um
the the I I think he would as well
because what was driving Einstein both
in theory of relativity and in his
critique of quantum theory as it was in
his day was realism
he understood science and physics as
being
the study of what reality is like
and these equivocations that that the
the quantum theory appeared to bring
namely uh well what do you really mean
by real and we can't really say what's
real we can only say what we observe
about the reality and so on in which
case science becomes the study of us it
becomes the study of our perceptions and
everything else is just a sort of
fiction
um that he he rejected rightly uh having
by the way believed stuff like that in
his Youth and rejected it in order to uh
make progress with relativity
um he then applied that idea of realism
to to the whole of Science and insisted
on that and rejected the the quantum
theory of the time as not being
realistic whereas
um
uh the the Everett theory is entirely
realistic in fact you can Define
many Universe quantum theory as just
just the statement that the equations of
quantum mechanics describe reality
that's all it is
let me let me bring up another
possible objection that Einstein might
have had Einstein has this wonderful
phrase
um I I have no idea when he said it but
that the goal of physics is to determine
whether uh God had any choice in making
the universe so it's it's a way of of
getting at the question of why do we
okay even after we
figure out the laws of the universe and
its history and so forth we still have
to ask why this universe why do we find
ourselves living in in a universe that
allowed our existence and so forth and
it seems to me that and there was a hope
Stephen Weinberg has also talked about
this that
um there would be a theory at some point
that would be kind of logically
inevitable or necessary and
um if you tried to tweak it it would
fall apart and it would and it would
make this universe that we live in also
uh necessary or inevitable in some sense
and what has happened over the last
couple of decades is that things have
gone completely in the opposite
direction and now you have theories that
predict basically an infinite number of
other universes uh so you're sort of
back to the arbitrariness of uh this one
uh and the problem as far as I can tell
it's gotten even worse
so yes I wonder how you respond to that
issue
so first of all I I if if one interprets
Einstein's view as that that quote of
Einstein's as as saying that we need an
ultimate explanation
then I think that that is uh a a chimera
I I think that that will never be found
and can never be found and if such a
thing could be found it would be a
catastrophe because it would be the end
of progress
um the uh and the progress in science is
intimately connected with all the other
kinds of progress so it would also lead
to the end of progress in the other ways
that we like such as morality politics
and so on but I I think there is
nevertheless a truth in it which is the
truth about good explanations what we
want about from a good explanation in in
the way I describe in the book
is that
um it be hard to vary that is uh it
um if you displace one note as as Chapa
said in the in the play Amadeus then
there's diminishment and if you displace
a phrase then the whole structure falls
apart so in that sense we want the
theory to have a good theory must have a
certain inevitability about it with
hindsight of course so with hindsight
you see that it couldn't have been in
any other way but what saves us from the
the evil implications of a fun of an
ultimate explanation is that good
explanations
solve the problems that they address but
they always raise new and better
problems so the the problems that we
have today for example in cosmology
about what the dark energy is that's
making the Universe
um expanded and accelerating rate one
one of the most startling discoveries of
Science in in recent times
that discovery
depended on the previous discovery of
the general theory of relativity and
cosmological models in that theory and
so on it's only
in the light of those theories that we
can even know that the acceleration that
the expansion of the universe is
accelerating and know that that's
amazing
so the solution in in solving the
problems that Einstein solved namely how
things like the motion of light and the
existence of gravity could be reconciled
in his general theory of relativity that
opened up problems that were simply
inconceivable before what one couldn't
have expressed them even in the language
of of physics or in the language of
Common Sense they were problems whose
that that that opened up because of the
solution of previous problems and that
is that's the solution to the conundrum
how we can get our
hard to vary good explanations without
grinding to a halt as a result it's
because good explanations open up new
problems
let me um
bring up another figure who's very
prominent in your work uh the
philosopher Carl popper who I was
fortunate enough to interview a few
years before he he uh died obviously
he's been a very big influence on you
um
and uh I just wonder how popper would
have reacted or did react I I
um I don't know if he ever wrote on
Multiverse theories but
um wouldn't I would suspect that popper
would have
um been a skeptic of Multiverse theories
because he was so insistent on
testability and
um it seems to me the Multiverse
theories are at the very least extremely
difficult to test and that any kind of
evidence you would have of their
existence would be circumstantial
at best so okay
um yes the two issues there
um uh one about the testability uh of uh
the many Universe interpretation and the
other one about Papa uh I was also
privileged to meet Papa on one occasion
uh when I was a student and I was lucky
enough to be invited along to a meeting
between Papa and my mentor Bryce DeWitt
my physics boss Bryce DeWitt and
basically at that meeting DeWitt told
Papa that he had misunderstood what the
fundamental problem is in quantum theory
uh the papa thought it was to give a
meaning to probability statements and
he'd kind of missed the the the deeper
problem of uh
things like entanglement and
interference and and the measurement
problem
and uh the popper said that that he had
realized that he had an inadequate
understanding and had held up
publication of one of his books in order
to try to improve it now I've looked at
his subsequent books and they all
contain the same misunderstanding of
quantum theory unfortunately when he
does he does occasionally mention the
many Universal interpretation but only
to dismiss it for kind of
non-philosophical reasons just to say
well you know we can't have that and
therefore I'm going to concentrate on
this other thing so Papa unfortunately
um like Einstein died too soon but not
too soon chronologically he just died
too soon for the uh right understanding
to have reached him I suppose that is is
is not a coincidence either because
um 90 of the physicists whom he might
have asked about the foundations of
quantum theory would have given him
nonsensical answers
um now as for the the
um
testability of uh the many Universal
interpretation this is I I as I said
that there are in principle tests that
would
um that were tested against the Rival
theory that there is only one universe
but really that is grossly understating
the scientific status of the theory it
the the reason that one what one doesn't
normally test an interpretation normally
in science one says that yes indeed the
equations of the theory do describe
reality and it's it's really only in the
case of quantum theory within physics
that somebody has said how can we test
the interpretation by itself
namely how can we test the statement
that these equations though they we're
not disputing that they correctly
predict experiments how can we test the
statement that in fact they represent
reality rather than just what we see in
reality now this this uh in in as I said
we've been here before in physics namely
at the time of Galileo and the and the
Inquisition
but in the present day there is a very
close analog of this and that is uh the
creationists who say that fossils no
one's ever seen a dinosaur just like no
one's ever seen the parallel universes
all we have is the circumstantial
evidence of fossils and the
interpretation of fossils as being the
remains of dinosaurs now similarly uh we
have
um no one's ever seen parallel universes
but what we have seen is interference
phenomena and the interpretation of
interference phenomena as being
due to the interaction of different
universes and there's no other
explanation so if you want to say the
other universes don't exist you have to
do it by Fiat rather than rather like
the people who say that the world was
created 6 000 years ago with fossils so
similarly the conventional
interpretations of quantum mechanics say
that at the moment of a measurement all
the universes except one
disappear don't exist and no one can
contradict this because no one can see
them
David I'll just tell you I think that's
a stretch to compare doubters of
parallel universes to and I count myself
one I'm not a doubter but more an
agnostic and someone who thinks that uh
it's kind of a mood issue because we'll
never have good evidence doubters of
these things to uh creationists who are
sure that dinosaurs really exists but
listen let's I I wanna I wanna get on to
another really big topic that you raised
in the book that by the way I was only
saying that the logic is the same the
psychological motivation is not the same
but the logic is the same because of the
existence of good explanations in both
cases but okay continue
all right
um a really wonderful theme that uh
emerged at a number of places through
your book was uh and I'll put it into my
own words and you can tell me if I've
gotten it wrong was a kind of critique
of
um simple reductionism or
materialism uh which obviously is the
kind of prevailing philosophy of uh of
uh physics that good answers will come
from going to smaller and smaller scales
and also focusing on on things on
objects on particles and so forth yes
um and uh you seem to be you are to my
mind uh saying that
um that is a much too restrictive form
of explanation and that we have to
recognize that what we might even call
uh immaterial phenomena that aren't
reducible to specific physical objects
or processes can have a profound impact
and have had a profound impact on
reality particularly our human reality
human history the world of uh of
politics and culture and so forth and it
seems to me you're almost it's almost a
rebuke of
um
of
uh physics as kind of the the the really
the best mode of understanding the world
um and your your you're emphasizing how
important mind is and ideas that are and
thoughts and so forth so I'll talk about
that a little bit
yes and of course I'm I am a physicist
and I'm profoundly opposed to uh any
idea of uh non-physical explanations
that contradict physics
so that's a No-No uh and and really
doesn't make sense however uh I I
um there are there are ways in which
both emergent properties such as minds
and life and so on have an effect and as
you said also abstractions now this this
the fact that the theory of good
explanations led to the idea that
abstractions are real things uh was
slightly surprising to me I wasn't
expecting the the the link at least I
wasn't expecting it to be so strong as
it is but the thing is if you think
about how to explain
events physical events like
um a footprint on the moon
how how do you explain how that happened
well
um it happened because of human ideas of
science
um and
human ideas you could say in this
reductionist sense that as you as you
rightly say is the prevailing mode of
explanation
um and the the prevailing idea is to
look down on other modes of explanation
that that those ideas are nothing more
than configurations of atoms so some
some physicists some rocket scientists
uh put their brain into certain
configurations of atoms and those atoms
then acted on other atoms which acted on
other atoms which then ended up making a
footprint on the moon now what that
misses
is the explanation of why certain
configurations of atoms
put footprints on the moon While others
the overwhelming majority of
configurations that human brains even
human brains have been put into in
history do not have that effect and it's
because of it's a there's a certain type
of information and this information
can't in my view be reduced to
um statements about atoms because
if you think about what that information
does it it is in brains but it's it the
same information then gets transferred
into let's say sound waves in air and
then it gets transferred into
um uh
uh Inc and income paper and then it gets
transferred into
magnetic domains inside a computer which
then control a machine that instantiates
those ideas in bits of Steel and silicon
and so on and and so on there's an
immense chain of instantiations of the
same information
and it's it's only special kinds of
information that have this property that
they are preserved and instantiated in
successive
um physical modes so what is being
transmitted what is having the causal
effect
is not
the atoms but the fact that the atoms
are in certain instantiate certain kinds
of information and not other kinds so
therefore it is the information that is
having the causal effect if a particular
instantiation of that information were
damaged then processes would come along
to fix it whether or not they could fix
the physical instantiation for example
if the computer goes wrong then the we
don't use the corrupted information we
go back and rescue the information from
a different computer and we throw away
the atoms that at one point instantiated
it so the information causes itself to
remain in existence now I think there's
no way out of that mode of explanation
and if explanation is going to be the
the fundamental thing about our
Criterion for example about what is or
isn't real then we have to say that
information and this particular kind
which we call knowledge
is real and really does cause things
can
that word choice
a number of
places in your book and you emphasize
the power of uh human Choice it seems to
me that what you were really doing is um
is defending the concept of free will
maybe you can tell me uh if if I'm if
I'm wrong here and I and um
uh as some of the uh listeners out there
uh know I am a free will fanatic I'm I'm
very upset that some prominent
scientists recently
um have uh have said that free will
probably doesn't exist it's it's an
illusion uh Stephen Hawking uh has said
as much Einstein
um
in a couple of his quotes suggests that
uh free will probably doesn't exist
um so you believe in Free Will I take it
but I certainly do and uh I think that
the argument against Free Will from
reductionism is just a mistake it's a
it's a fundamental mistake it's the idea
that the that all explanation must be in
terms of microscopic uh things
um there's no
um philosophical for argument in favor
of that that I'm aware of it's just an
assumption it has historical roots in
how science centuries ago escaped from
the clutches of the Supernatural and as
I said earlier certainly I'm opposed to
any kind of
um modes of explanation in terms of
things like in terms of immaterial
things in terms of abstractions that
contradict physics but the idea that all
such explanations by their very nature
contradict physics is simply false I I
just gave an explanation of footprints
on the moon in terms of
the ability of certain types of
information to preserve themselves in
existence and so on whereas other kinds
don't that I defy anyone to to
reproduce in terms of atoms and I also
Define anyone to show how that
contradicts an explanation in terms of
atoms so we have to accept the physical
world as we find it we have to find the
best explanations that explain it rather
than impose by Dogma a Criterion that
explanations have to meet other than
that they explain reality
so I I think this this uh reductionism
that fashionable reductionism is just a
mistake I'm sure that Free Will exists
however
I think Free Will is one of a
constellation of
emergent abstract uh we're not sure
exactly what proportion the Free Will is
abstract or emergent
um properties that are not yet
understood uh things like Consciousness
uh creativity
um a choice Free Will and so on they we
do have good explanations about them at
the emergent level but we don't
understand them well enough
to make artificial ones and I I say in
the book that my Criterion for
judging any Theory Of Consciousness Free
Will and and so on is can you program it
and
um if you can't program it then I cannot
take seriously your theory of it now I
don't have a theory of it I only have a
theory that it exists now if someone
says that it doesn't exist because we
can explain everything without invoking
it I want to see those explanations
um
Roger Penrose I I assume that you know
him yes um
has proposed a solution to the mind-body
problem
involving quantum mechanics working in
some way yes to me this the Mind Body
problem and and Free Will which is
obviously a big part of it is the
biggest
uh the biggest unsolved problem in um in
science and people are just grasping
these big ones right now so I just
wonder if you see any
Sky ideas that might
provide a kind of framework for
understanding it may be also information
Theory which some people have have also
tried to bring into physics
well as you said uh Roger Penrose is
looking for a uh a new Theory to replace
quantum theory which would not only
um be a better
Theory and physics than Quantum
Interiors but would also solve problems
like the existence of Free Will and
creativity and so on and I'm pretty
skeptical for the same reason that I'm
skeptical of the mathematical approaches
that are currently fashionable in
fundamental physics I think that one
solves problems in physics by addressing
problems that are in physics rather than
hoping that they have certain attributes
finding a theory with those attributes
and then hoping that it applies to
physics but you know uh I could be wrong
but at present there are no such
theories
um I think
um
existing approaches to
AI artificial general intelligence
are all
[Music]
um
uh
uh they all are philosophically flawed
and I think that's why they haven't
succeeded for decades because they
um
they are a philosophical Advance is
needed
um and they are trying to get the answer
without making any philosophical advance
and that leads them essentially to sort
of behaviorist
um models of what
um we I we and behaviorist models are
are non-explanatory models they are
models that just try to relate output to
input without explaining why the output
comes from the input and so on and I
think that that approach can't succeed
and it's the reason that uh this quest
for AI has has not got anywhere during
the last decades
um what we need is first
philosophical progress in understanding
how creativity I think that's the key
thing that that relates all these
um
unsolved problems about Free Will
Consciousness and and uh so on how
creativity is implemented and it has to
be implemented we know a few things it
has to be uh in the broadest sense a an
evolutionary process it has to work by
variation and selection or as Papa calls
it in the case of science uh conjecture
and refutation or conjecture and
criticism
um but we need to know the details and
devil will be in the details my guess is
that once we understand what it is
uh we will be able to program it uh I
think there's a there's an analogy here
with with
um Darwin's theory of evolution that
Darwin Darwin's great contribution in my
view is not his scientific theory of
evolution it is the philosophical
progress that he made in inventing a new
mode of explanation just not not just a
new explanation but a new mode
previously everyone could address the
question
why are animals the way they are why why
are they why are there adaptations there
everyone who who
um people try to address this by
Supernatural explanations and also by
scientific explanations but all of them
took for granted that what you had to do
is find a reason why there are elephants
why elephants have long trunks that kind
of thing
and Darwin realized that that is a bad
way of approaching the problem to
understand why elephants have long
trunks you must not ask why they have
them as your initial question you must
ask what kind of process could give rise
to Trunks and then that they have
purposes and some biological features
have purposes some have anti-purposes
like the peacock's tail and so on that
all comes out in the sophisticated
elaboration of the basic theory of how
it could possibly happen by variation
and selection by by random variation
that is undirected variation and then
directed selection
now um
Free Will Consciousness and so on
definitely involves that as well
but it involves something else that we
don't yet understand which it will take
a new Darwin to realize
and once the new Darwin has realized it
it will be well it took many decades
between Darwin and DNA
I think it will be much faster it will
be in between the the person who
discovers the correct philosophy of
um Ai and the programming of the AI will
be a matter of months not decades
I hope I live long enough to see that
um I also I I would be very exciting I I
in the limited time we have left I want
to make sure that we touch on some of
the
the political themes that you raise in
your book I mean it really is uh part of
the um what I enjoyed about the book was
that it was so Broad and you had these
very powerful ideas especially about
accepting our fallibility as kind of a
mode to constant self
um Improvement and applying that in all
these different fields uh science
culture and politics so when it comes to
politics
um I wanted to ask you uh whether or not
you think that
um you know Francis fukuyama had this I
had a book called The End Of History
where he's saying that uh in a very
broad sense democracy plus uh free
market capitalism represents the best we
can do as far as finding a way of
organizing ourselves and I just one
Wonder although you know of course
there's a lot of tweaking we can do I
just wonder if uh you agree with that or
if you think that there could also be
infinite progress in the realm of
politics
the same arguments that I use in the
book for everything else apply
automatically to politics and imply that
that infinite Improvement unlimited
Improvement is better word is possible
there too
the liberal democracy plus free market
capitalism is the the best knowns the
the our best existing knowledge of this
and so I I would guess that fukuyama
despite recent hiccups in his
predictions
um is right that the ideas that that
um had been the main Rivals to those
ideas during let's say the early 20th
centuries such as totalitarianism uh
communism and so on that those
um
are going into the Dustbin of History I
think that is very different from saying
that our best guess as to how to create
new political knowledge is going to be
just our current institutions I'm I'm
sure that unlimited Improvement is
possible there too uh the the uh for one
thing we haven't solved the enormously
important problem of how to transmit
this knowledge to political cultures
that don't yet have it
and it seems that there's something
about our existing political culture
that is actually antagonistic to
transmitting it outside its natural home
um so that it will be a major
Improvement because uh as Martin Reese
said in his recent book in which he
predicts that
um there's only a 50 chance of
civilization surviving the next century
um
progress in other areas
especially technological areas mean that
smaller and smaller numbers of people
are going to be able to do larger and
larger amounts of damage
and so unless the
um
uh means of
promoting
um
the resolution of agreements without
violence of disagreements without
violence
can be propagated to basically the whole
world we're going to be in increasing
Danger from things like weapons of mass
destruction in the hands of terrorists
by the way I think this is not just
a political a problem with improving our
political system
it's a general problem to do with
technology and everything else because
um apart from
trying to I should say that that that
our civilization the civilization of the
west of liberal democracy and capitalism
and so on is within itself inside itself
it is by far the most peaceful
uh as well as the most rapidly
progressing civilization that's ever
existed but I think that that apart from
having to improve it further in order to
allow it to survive there's another
thing we have to do and this is a big
theme of my book as well
we have to make continue to make rapid
progress and it's not just for its own
sake but in this context
um of in this political context it's
because rapid progress is the basic
means
by which the good guys can defend
themselves against the bad guys I've
said that that
um technology makes a smaller and
smaller number of people able to cause
larger and larger effects well that
has to be offset by the larger number of
people the the the the good guys
making at least as much progress as that
in order to
be able to con to cause even larger
effects in self-defense so it's a rapid
progress that is our only our major
um means of self-defense against the
instabilities caused by small numbers of
bad people okay wait a minute I've got a
I've gotta stop you there I that sounds
to me like
um more arms races in the future I I you
know we've we've already been down that
path and and produced nuclear arsenals
capable of destroying all life on Earth
many times that yes that that's not the
implication of what uh of what I was
saying that that's to interpret it in
terms of the technology of the past it's
a sort of reductionist interpretation if
I may say so
um the the kind of pro for example
um
uh protecting ourselves against nuclear
attack during the Cold War was done and
rather imperfectly done by uh developing
ways of nuclear attack ourselves
but protecting against uh let's say
um
uh biological warfare attacks has got
nothing to do with well perhaps it it
also involves developing weapons uh as a
means of developing uh antidotes against
them but it's basically what we need in
the case of biological warfare is
antidotes not weapons and antidotes are
and this is going to be increasingly so
as the complexity and knowledge in
society becomes the thing that we need
to protect
once we have uh for example once we are
able to download our brains into at the
con our minds from our brains into
computers and so on then
um physical protection of of them will
be will become much less important
compared with protection of them from
bad ideas which would use creativity to
destroy all the backups and that that is
uh I mean I'm I'm talking about the
ultimate extreme of the process which is
already there in the fact that we
um that that defending against
biological weapons involves not
biological weapons but antidotes right
that kind of Rapid progress is essential
to the future of civilization
um what other uh okay boy you're just
you're just
popping open cans of worms all over the
place here David and we're and we're
basically out of time but um I just
wanted to make sure that we touched on
at the very end here your views on
um our environmental problems on global
warming the uh the question of uh
sustainability
[Music]
um you uh you're you're quite critical
um of of the concept of sustainability
and
um also of what I you might call I don't
know environmental alarmism you you
recall uh hearing Paul Ehrlich give one
of his gloom and doom speeches decades
ago and and you were pretty dismissive
because you thought that Ehrlich wasn't
uh anticipating any technological
progress that might help us overcome
these problems so yeah just give us uh
give us a quick picture of your view on
um on our our
uh sustainable or not sustainable future
so I I think it's a a great pity that uh
the issue of
um how to manage the environment has
become a political issue because as a
political issue it has become dogmatic
and the dogmas on all sides are simply
false they
um they uh contradict the the arguments
of my book that and what more can I say
um the the
um
on the one side we have uh the people
who say that the only way of ensuring
our survival in the long run is in
damping down our impact on the
environment now damping down our impact
on the environment is itself an impact
on the environment there's there's no
there's no fundamental difference
between changes that we cause changes
that it causes or changes that we cause
by trying to undo things that we have
done all those things require knowledge
all of all of them require technology
all of them are going to give rise to
unknown problems in the future
uh and on the other hand there are there
are people who try to deny that physics
is relevant if it contradicts
um uh the the political dogma and that's
not true either the the
um
um it it's rather unfortunate that in
the case of global warming the exact
details of
uh how soon this is going to become a
major problem depend on supercomputer
simulations
the thing is that that
um that it is going to become a problem
eventually doesn't need supercomputer
simulations it's politically important
whether the Tipping Point is likely to
come in 50 years or 150 years that the
difference between those is enormously
important politically but it's not at
all important technologically it seems
to me it seems to me that in both cases
we need a very rapid progress and we
need to assume that the solution is
going to come from this rapid scientific
and technological progress and that this
won't be the last problem that ever
faces us what what's strange arrogance
it is among the opponents of arrogance
in technology to assume that global
warming is going to be the last major
problem that will ever face our species
that that is that is seems to me
ridiculous and the task of technology is
not to
optimize the entire planet to solve one
particular problem that we happen to
know about but to give us the means of
first of all addressing problems that we
do not yet know about and secondly
the means to recover from disasters that
will also inevitably happen when we make
mistakes
and both those things
um dealing with unforeseen problems and
recovering both those things require
knowledge and we need that's why we need
to
um increase knowledge as fast as we can
um
one final question and and I I'm sorry
about your your answer has to be fairly
brief I just wonder where your your
optimism comes from I I hope you don't
mind uh my saying I don't mean this is
an insult but it approaches a kind of
faith
um and I wonder if uh if that faith has
anything to do with a kind of
spirituality on your part uh belief in I
don't know God or something
no so well first of all I I deny it I I
deny that I have any faith religious or
otherwise and I deny that I have any
spirituality and I also deny that this
optimism is an attribute of me
um it's as if you were saying uh what
kind of predisposition to multiplicity
LED you to become a a defender of the
parallel universes interpretation that's
not how it happened the reach comes from
the ideas not from what I want them to
say
uh so I I can know more deny the links
between the theory of evolution in
biology and in let's say human ideas
then I can deny that they apply to one
particular animal if the theory of
evolution is true then all animals in
evolved and if somebody wants to say all
animals except Elephants or as
historically happened all animals except
humans uh evolved then that doesn't make
sense as an explanation and what I'm
about what my books are both about is
taking explanation seriously and
requiring them to be good explanations
not requiring them to meet a
predetermined
um uh to to have predetermined
implications
well listen there are a lot of
pessimists out there
um as as you know I'm sure you've gotten
some pushback against your your vision
of the future uh so I urge them all to
read your book and uh give your ideas a
chance and it might even make some of
those pessimists out there a little less
gloomy well that's great and I'm glad
that you're not one
I'm working on it thank you very much
David it was really a pleasure
okay
nice talking to you all right same here